[APPLAUSE]
>> We were talking, while
we were taking a break,
or at least you were--
[LAUGHTER]
A new religion was invented
while you were actually
taking your break.
And this is it.
And literally, it is the
belief that when you die,
your soul flies onto the
roof and get stuck there.
[LAUGHTER]
You can't take this
stuff too seriously.
All right.
Now then, as I said before,
you can't touch the Templars
without scratching the Grail.
And I didn't want to go
there, but you know what?
You kind of have to.
It's just the way it is.
The Grail is such
a complex subject.
So much has been
written about it.
It's like pyramids.
So much stuff is
written upon it.
And some of it's very good.
Some of it's complete nonsense.
And then there's all
this stuff in between.
So I thought, OK, let
me go in this direction.
Let me just find out
what the Grail is about,
because even I didn't know
what the Grail was about,
it was so confusing as a story.
For one thing, it's been
described as a chalice.
It's been described as a bowl,
a cauldron, a womb, a woman,
and even the holy bloodline,
just to really make
things even more complicated.
But the primary benefit that
seems to come from the Grail
is that it has the power to
restore life to the dead.
But the perks-- the perks.
The drugs.
Where's my scotch?
[LAUGHTER]
This organization, honestly.
It's getting--
[LAUGHTER]
But since restoring a
dead organism back to life
contradicts the
laws of nature, it
is very likely
that the phrase was
intended to be
taken metaphorically
or even allegorical.
And why?
Well, as we already know, every
esoteric and gnostic tradition
conceal its most important
ideas in symbols--
important ideas in
symbols and metaphors.
And it did this as a means
to hide important information
from abuse--
and in my case, to
protect the writers
from torture, imprisonment,
and certain death.
So you use symbols to
convey information.
So with that in mind, let's
look at the earliest version
of the story as it appeared
in the medieval era
to try and make
sense of the Grail.
The Templars had many
high-ranking sympathizers,
and one of them was
the enlightened Queen
of France Eleanor of Aquitaine.
If you don't think that
women were part of the plot
back then, you're very mistaken.
They very much were at
the center of the plot.
And in 1160, the
daughter of Eleanor,
she becomes the patronness
of a poet called Cretien,
who happens to live
in a town called
Troye, which we met earlier--
named, incidentally,
after the town from where
the Trojans came from.
So the poet Cretien
joins her court
and writes a book called
"Le Conte del Graal."
And that's the story in which a
long and seemingly futile quest
for a supreme
object is carefully
wrapped in a symbolism so as
to ward off charges of heresy
from the Church.
And at the very core,
the story's hero
is a knight who is
mortally wounded.
He trains with a
spiritual mentor
and then embarks on
a long quest filled
with all kinds of challenges.
And yet despite
the challenges, he
returns, whereupon he
weds a beautiful maiden,
and at which point his eyes
are opened to a great mystery.
And so, in a matter of
speaking, a dead man
is brought back to life.
A significant moment
in Cretien's story
occurs when the hero is witness
to a procession in which
a young, beautiful maiden
carries a radiant golden object
on a salver.
And this is called the Grail.
Now, the salver is also a very
interesting part of the story
because it is a ceremonial
tray made of silver.
So here, we also have
symbolism taking place,
because we have gold
on top of silver,
so the alchemical
union of the masculine
and the feminine, also otherwise
known as the sun and the moon.
All the same story.
This connection between this
important tray and the Grail
is crucial to understanding
what the Templars were actually
doing in Portugal.
So I'm going to bring
this up much later on,
also to test you to make sure
you're still paying attention.
There are many iterations
of the story of the Grail,
and one later
iteration of the story
adds a few more juicy
bits to the story.
In the later version,
there is a description
of how a brotherhood of
the Grail quest is fed,
and I quote, "By a stone
that fell from the sky."
Now, this stone is very
unusual, because apparently, it
can revitalize the ill.
It prolongs life.
It rebuilds vigor and youth.
And most important of all,
it is capable of resurrecting
the body.
And it is referred
to as the Grail.
Now, I don't know
what he was smoking,
but obviously, such a
description is ridiculous.
Meteorites just don't
behave like this.
They don't bring people
back from the dead,
and they don't certainly
revitalize and prolong life.
But to the esoteric thinker
who reads such stories
symbolically, this stone
that fell from the sky
is essentially a
library of knowledge
that descends from a
very highest source.
Now, one of the
earliest versions
of this interpretation,
of course,
is the tablets of laws that were
handed to some guy called Moses
high up in a mountain.
And yet, if they
only took a look
at what was happening in
Egypt back in 3,000 BC,
there right there in
front of your eyes, here
are the two tablets of the laws
on the headdress of the god
Amun that look suspiciously like
the two tablets that were later
handed to Moses as well.
And of course, Amun is one of
the architects of the universe.
So the Grail story
of a dying person
who pursues divine wisdom
in the form of a sacred text
and becomes risen by the
knowledge they contain,
this concept has been around
in one form or another
since 2,700 BC.
And you find the
same story in China.
You find the same story in
India and also in Egypt.
And in every single
case, they all
describe the spiritual
path of an initiate.
In every one of these
quests for divine knowledge,
the initiate learns to balance
the masculine and the feminine
within, which allows the
person to remain faithful,
and I quote, "to the
maiden he marries."
So this woman that this
person marries on the quest
must have possessed
exceptional qualities,
because this man
protects her at any cost.
He will lay down
his life for her.
And indeed, she is one
radiant, beautiful woman
because she is later referred
to as Sophis, otherwise known
in Greek as Wisdom.
So this person is
laying down his life
to marry this woman which is
the representation of wisdom
itself.
She is the divine feminine.
She is the Grail.
She represents the knowledge
of the very highest degree,
otherwise known as the
very laws of nature.
Powerful stuff.
So in all cases, the
knowledge, properly applied,
liberates and invigorates
the individual
because its philosophy
becomes his or her
spiritual foundation.
So in a matter of
speaking, by applying it,
the initiate is
raised from ignorance.
He's literally
raised from the dead,
and that's where the term
becomes very important.
So how does all of this
apply to our good friends
the Knights Templar?
Well, the inner
brotherhood, obviously,
from what we've said before,
was pursuing a spiritual quest
that culminated in a ritual
in which the candidates were
declared risen.
Now we are getting very
close to discovering
the relationship between
ancient restricted knowledge,
secret ritual chambers, and why
the Templars created a kingdom
within a kingdom far
from Rome in order
to practice in peace a
doctrine that allowed newcomers
to be initiated into very
ancient mystery secrets.
It certainly would explain
why people loved the Templars.
They just happened to
show up on their doorstep
and they'd say,
please, take my land.
Take all my money, what
little I have, and everything.
And the fact that they
were just nine guys
suggests that the
threat of violence
really wasn't high on the list.
It's not exactly threatening.
So obviously, they were offering
something of extreme importance
to people.
And back in the
day, the Church had
a monopoly on all this stuff.
If the Templars were offering
something different, of course
you're going to make
friends with them.
So let's see where
all of this leads
to in relation to Portugal.
If you recall, the Grail
is a gold shining light
or object carried on a salver.
And a salver is a
very unusual word.
And I love unusual
words because once you
start looking at etymology,
they start giving you
all kinds of information.
In early Latin, salver
is salve, and it means
sampling of food or drink.
I'm wondering, what this got
to do with the Grail story
and a ceremonial tray?
And it comes from salve,
which means to save.
And the same word
exists in Portuguese.
In fact, it's the foundation
of our modern term salvation.
And of course, if
you look at this
from an esoteric point
of view, salvation
is the reward for
pursuing the knowledge
for the attainment of the
Grail, for this knowledge
of the working
mechanics of nature.
So they begin to
wonder, was salvation
a sufficient motivation for a
handful of guys, some warrior
monks, who came from northern
Europe across hostile terrain,
to embark on a
quest in Jerusalem
to locate ancient texts,
then sail 2,000 miles west
to set up a Portuguese crown?
Maybe.
After all, the Catholic
Church back in the day
was the predominant power.
It had a monopoly on salvation.
And their version,
according to the facts,
was extremely dubious.
In fact, they weren't saving.
They were actually imprisoning
and murdering their way
through the whole of Europe.
And from this
point in our story,
the coincidences
begin to compound.
Here is the center
of the Templar
world in the 12th century.
It's not in France.
It's not England.
It's not in Jerusalem.
It is a third of the territory
of the country of Portugal,
Europe's first nation state.
And they inherited
this little yellow area
in a really unusual way.
And I love it when stories
are unusual because it's
as though they do
it deliberately
to get your attention later on.
Here's what happens.
After King Alfonso secures
the Portuguese nation state,
he awards a third of his
country to the Knights.
Very weird.
The caveat for this
donation was that the land
should be free from all
official and ecclesiastical
interference.
Now, first of all,
it's a lot of land.
Not only is it free for them to
do whatever they want in here,
it's free from the Church and
interference in the Portuguese
state itself.
And yet they are in the
Portuguese state itself.
A good portion of this territory
back in the 12th century
was complete wasteland.
It was the medium point between
the fighting between the Arabs
and the Portuguese.
And they were literally
on Portuguese soil.
And it was wasteland.
And yet this territory
that the Templars
were adamant on receiving
it was received in trade
with the Church for a capital
city and rich agricultural land
that the Templars already owned.
So one therefore has to ask
and question this logic.
Why did the Templars negotiate
such a ridiculous deal?
It's as though they were after
something of great importance
that was in this territory.
It suggested there was
a preplanned thought
that they wanted this
soil because there
was some underlying
force that they
felt would underpin
the idea that they
were trying to promote.
And indeed, to this very day,
that little stretch of yellow
marks a very ancient tract of
land that was run by the Celts.
And the name, still
exists to this very day
for this territory, is
the territory of Beta.
And if you're a Celt
or if you're Irish,
you'll know this woman because
she is the mother of the gods.
[SPEAKING GAELIC] If you
want to write that down,
I'm not going to
spell that for you.
It's not phonetic.
But this is the
territory, literary,
of the mother of the gods,
the divine virgin herself.
So the Templars
obviously sought this
because there was something of
great importance on this land
that was directly related
to a divine virgin
and had been so for
thousands of years.
So it was here that the
Templars created this kingdom
within a kingdom.
And they continued living there
long after they were wiped out
by the Church.
The other place where they
also survive, of course,
is in Scotland.
And I'll talk about that later.
So this, again,
was the focal point
of that territory,
the town of Thamara,
this mysterious little town
with gorgeous little Templar
castle on top.
Lots of pastry shops
and other things.
And as I said earlier,
it means palm tree.
But again, palm trees
couldn't grow there back then.
It was too cold to
grow palm trees.
Why would they name
a town a palm tree
if there was no palm trees?
And why, in this Portuguese
iteration, the town means "to
drink."
Well, how do you drink a town?
No idea.
Perhaps the name itself
that the Templars
gave it is the key to
the actual mystery.
Well consider this.
The ritual of resurrection
practiced by the Templars
and the Essenes
before them was based
on the ancient Egyptian
ritual and its central figure,
the god-man Osiris, who
takes on the symbol of a palm
tree in one of the versions
of the story following
his own resurrection ritual.
So the Templars may
have been implying
that the town of
Thamara is itself
the doorway into that
ritual, particularly
its most interesting building
on top of the actual hill.
And here it is, the rotunda.
It's a beautiful building.
The fact is that just as
Cretien, the poet Cretien,
is sitting in Troye
writing the Grail story,
the Templars are
laying the cornerstone
for this unusual round church.
What a strange coincidence.
It's been sitting
there all along.
And I thought, it's too good
of a connection to pass up.
There has to be a
relationship going on here.
And when you go there--
and you should do.
It's beautiful.
It stands inside a castle on a
limestone hill above the town,
and it bears a
striking resemblance
to the Abbey of Notre Dame
on Mount Sinai and Jerusalem,
where our former friends,
the order of Sion,
one of the formative groups that
literally created the Templars,
comes from.
So there's a visual
relationship.
Well, before the Templars
set about building this,
they first erected a church
at the bottom of the hill.
And it's a lovely church.
It's still there.
And they dedicated it
to a divine virgin.
Surprise, surprise.
The site had already
been famous and used
for at least 2,500
years before them,
and it too was venerated
for a divine virgin.
And we know this because
the very blatant symbol
of Isis and the divine
feminine is placed prominently
above the altar.
So there's a pentagram.
Now, what on earth
is a pentagram
doing in a church, in
a Christian church?
Oh, dear.
So this is what I'm saying,
that the temples are still alive
and well in Portugal.
Portugal's a very
Catholic country,
and yet they can still
get away with this today.
This whole building's been
totally remodeled and restored,
and yet the pentagram remains.
There are people within this
town that are maintaining
a very quiet status quo.
And if you talk to
the right people,
then you come across the right
people in your coincidences,
you get to hear all kinds
of interesting information.
Of course, if I told you,
I'd have to kill you.
[LAUGHTER]
That's the way it is.
Now, here's the funny thing.
During the restoration
work that was conducted
at this church in the
1940s, the builders
found a tunnel that
goes under the crypt,
and it leads under the river.
And it continues for one mile
to the central plaza of Thamara,
and it leads to this very
unusual Templar church
dedicated to John the Baptist.
They weren't subtle
about these things.
And by the way, if
you're a Freemason,
you'll appreciate the
checkerboard pattern
in front of the building today.
So this wonderful church
is connected a mile away
by this underground tunnel.
That's a lot of digging.
But there is a wonderful
feature, and it's right there.
And everybody goes
right past it.
Let's take a close look at this.
It's a bas relief.
It's a very, very old.
It was put there at the
inauguration of the church.
Highly eroded, but
you can still make out
the shape of a dog and a lion
and this kind of fleur-de-lis
coming between
them in the center.
And like I said, everybody
goes right past this.
No one pays any attention.
They'll take a picture.
They don't think much about it.
Well, if you're an ancient
Egyptian looking at this,
you think, well,
wait a minute, that's
actually a very interesting
symbol, because the dog is
the dog star.
That's Sirius.
And Sirius has always
been associated
with the repository of divine
knowledge, especially when you
put it next to an
image of a lion,
because lion is the
symbol of Regulus,
and Regulus in so many of
the old mystery schools
represents the doorway
to the mysteries.
So we have two
animals representing
two constellations that are
related to ancient mystery
schools.
And in between them, this
fleur-de-lis in a stylized form
comes up between them, the very
symbol of the holy bloodline.
What on Earth has this got
to do with this church,
and why is it there?
Well, you go inside.
Beautiful place.
It is filled with the most
wonderful pagan symbology.
Like I said, it's a highly
Catholic part of the world,
and yet you find effigies
of the green man everywhere.
Well, that have no place in a
Catholic place of veneration,
although it may
surprise you to find
that there are more
effigies of the green man,
the regenerative god of
nature which basically spews
vegetation from his mouth--
And he is reborn again.
He rises from the dead on
the winter solstice sunrise.
Sound familiar?
You find more images of this
guy in churches in Europe
than images of Mary
and Jesus combined.
Look closely.
They're all there.
And there's also, in addition
to this wonderful figure
of the green man, a pillar
with these two dragons emitting
something out of their mouth.
Now, that to me, as a
person who seeks energy
and subtle energies on
the land and as a dowser,
has always been a symbol of
a position in the building
where the energy
lines are attracted.
So if you know what
you're looking for--
and as I said before, every
single ancient sacred site,
including the ancient
churches on top of them,
are all positioned on top of
the crossing of the Earth's
telluric currents.
Whenever you find
symbols like this,
it was the way that the
architects communicated
to show you, if you
stand on the spot,
you're standing on
the energy lines.
And you're going
to start feeling--
and this is a very
technical term--
the tingly-winglies.
[LAUGHTER]
And you do.
You stand here.
You start to feel
your tingly-winglies.
And if you've done
this, you know this.
If you've been to sacred
sites long enough,
you begin to soak up the
energy like a sponge.
And you begin to
develop qualities
that you never thought you had.
You begin to develop
a certain clairvoyant
ability to see through things
and you seem to hear things.
And to me, it now
becomes second nature.
And I was standing exactly at
the spot where that picture is
on the right in the
gap between the two
pillars of the green
man and the dragon.
And suddenly, it's as
if a TV screen just
comes down in front of my--
in my head and shows
me this alignment that
goes between the rotunda,
which is on the hill behind me,
threads the needle
through this altar.
There's a tiny gap.
And it continues, and
it's sharing me Jerusalem.
And I'm going,
this is very weird.
But I've had enough
experience to understand
that weird things happen for
you to write them down and then
go and research it later.
And that's what I did.
So I basically went
back onto Google Earth,
which is a really addictive
and pretty accurate program.
And I thought, what is it
true that if I'm standing here
and I'm threading a needle,
that there is somehow
this church with this bas
relief behind me of this dog,
the image of Sirius,
and Regulus, the lion,
that somehow there's an
alignment between the church
of St. John the
Baptist and Mount
Zion and Jerusalem and the
rotunda on top of the hill?
Well, guess what?
It does.
And it's almost
2,000 miles long.
That's one hell of a
threading of a needle.
And this just comes from
being, basically, standing
in the spirit of place,
allowing yourself to there
and be receptive
without a point of view.
Because otherwise, it comes from
your head, comes from your ego.
It has to come from a
neutral point of view
when you have these
things that just happen.
And if you do the
research, it's there.
You just have to
follow the clues.
And it does end up literally
on the Church of Mount Zion.
I thought that was pretty
good for a day's work
until like I thought, well,
I've got Capricorn rising.
I can't possibly let
the story end there.
I am a bit more
curious than that.
Let's look at the three
places in Jerusalem,
the three properties
that are intimately
associated with
this story today,
with the Templars and
the Order of Sion.
Now, there's a church
of the Holy Sepulcher
where the two original Templars
really began the story.
There's Solomon's
Stables, which are the one
place that the Templars asked
the King of Jerusalem, hey,
would you mind
vacating your house
because we really
want to live here?
And he goes, hey, absolutely.
And I think the King was
bigger than they were.
He could've just beaten them up.
But no.
No, please.
Go ahead, have my house.
And he's the King, and they're
just a couple of tramps.
You put that next to--
put a pin in there,
and put the third pin
literally on the center of
the Abbey on Mount Zion,
and you get--
and I mean a perfect
isosceles triangle.
And I mean absolutely perfect.
And I thought, now,
what are the chances
of that happening by accident?
And I thought,
well, what happens
if you bisect the triangle?
This is where you end up.
You end up in Egypt
inside the Osireion.
You can't make this
stuff if you could.
It's either right or it's wrong.
You can do this on
Google Earth yourself.
So this is supposedly,
if you follow
some of the traditions,
an underground chamber.
Actually, it isn't.
There's a recent
geological account
which I read, which I hope
it wasn't yours, Robert.
Maybe it is.
Apparently, there's
new evidence that
shows that the mud that's built
up around the actual temple
is the build up of mud now
from over 12,000 years.
So originally, it was a
freestanding structure
resembling a natural cave.
But that's another story.
So apparently, this is where
the resurrection mysteries
of Osiris were
supposedly enacted
by initiates who were admitted
into an exclusive brotherhood.
And when they built
the temple of Abydos
above it in this
underground chamber,
there is this mural depicting
the figurative resurrection
of Osiris.
So we're talking about the
connection between living
resurrection that starts in
Portugal, goes to Jerusalem,
gets bisected, and ends up back
at its original point in Egypt.
You're talking about a lot
of geometric connections
spanning thousands of years.
It's like they're asking
you to follow the plot.
Let's go back to Thamara.
This is the end of that
other imaginary line,
and it's the rotunda.
And since then, it's become less
of a freestanding structure.
It's now had a convent
bolted onto it.
And that was done
in the 14th century.
And it's a beautiful place.
You should see it for itself.
It's also, by the way, the
terminus of the tunnel that
began at that first church
that the Templars built.
So 1 and 1/2 miles under
the river, under the town,
up the hill, and then here.
That's a lot of digging.
The Templars apparently
just loved digging
wherever they went.
And all around this building,
this beautiful rotunda
and the chapel that
was built around it,
there's all kinds
of symbols and clues
that secret esoteric work
was once practiced here.
Because you don't go
around advertising
these things, least
of all at a time when
the Church is after you.
So you want to keep it
kind of under the radar.
If you spend a whole day
here-- and I spent many,
many days in the convent
around the rotunda--
it's full of bases.
There are hundreds, hundreds
of bases on the ceiling.
And never did I
imagined that walking
around all day long
looking at the ceiling
would be so productive.
Because of all the bases
that I found, and there's
a lot of them, there's only
one that looks like this.
And this is the figure
of Hermes Trismegistus,
the thrice great god of wisdom.
Some of you may know him
by another name, Djehuty,
the Egyptian god of
wisdom, who also happens
to be renamed by
the Greeks as Thoth,
the man with the ibis head.
So we're looking here at the
very symbol of ancient wisdom.
He is the guardian
of the mysteries.
He also happens to be
the guardian of the gate
into the other world
which initiates accessed
during an out-of-body
ritual performed
in secret underground
chambers often referred
to as bridal chambers, because
that's where the initiate was
coupled with his divine bride,
which goes back to the Grail
story about the guy
who goes walkabout,
has his extraordinary
experience,
comes back and weds
his divine woman.
So I thought, if this is the
only place in the entire area
that has this marker, makes a
wonderful marker for locating
a restricted chamber.
This is how you think.
And under it, there is a
door, and you can't get in.
So I talked to the director,
and I said, I'm just a schmuck
walking around.
Would you mind letting me know
what's going on under here?
He goes, oh, absolutely.
I find that when you behave like
an idiot, they leave you alone.
I really believe that.
And you open the door.
He opens the door.
We go down a spiral staircase
that goes clockwise,
which is the esoteric direction
of going into something.
You've got to pay
attention to these signs.
And sure enough, there is a
room that is out of access
to the public, and it's
described as a wine cellar.
Now I'm no connoisseur
of wine, but I
do know one thing about wine.
You have to find a very
dry space to store wine
for obvious reasons.
This is perhaps the most humid
part of the entire convent.
They may have used it in
recent years to store wine.
The monks only left
about 80 years ago.
But it doesn't make any sense.
You did not store wine in
a very humid environment.
It sits three floors
below the rotunda's floor.
It is full of symbolism for
a wine storage department.
All you have to do is
look at the ceiling again.
And you can read
all kinds of things
into this if you
want to, but I just
thought it was unusual
that there is exactly
seven bases on the ceiling, as
though someone is referencing
the chakras of the human body
or the notes of the music
scale, the do-re-me.
Well, it does turn out that
when you measure the room,
its design is exactly
the double octave.
So something about
the bases is telling
about the way the
room was designed
to induce a certain effect.
And indeed, when you do
the lightest hum in there,
the reverb is just beautiful.
It immediately puts you
in a state of reflection.
I can't really describe it any
other way unless you go there.
So you look at all
the bases, and there's
two that differ
from all the others.
And this is in the place where
the crown chakra would be.
And it is actually the
depiction of the crown chakra
as depicted in Eastern cultures,
with one big difference.
The circle is divided
exactly into 17 rays, which
is a very unusual and awkward
number to divide a circle into.
So I have never quite
figured out what
it means, except for
the fact that when I've
talked to Freemasons who
are good friends of mine,
they said it's actually
one of the closest
held secrets in Freemasonry
is the 17th degree.
And it has to do
with something to do
with energy and the way you can
work energy in a certain way.
And they wouldn't
elucidate any more on that
because I'm not a Mason.
But I also found a wonderful
numerical correspondence here
because apparently, there
are 17 side chambers that
make up the Osireion
at Abydos, which
is where this story
eventually ends up,
back in the resurrection
chamber of Osiris.
Now this symbol, this bas on
the ceiling, has at its center
this rose.
And in the world of
secret societies,
the members would always
conduct their secret meetings
in a place called sub rosa, and
it means "beneath the rose."
And it was a symbol and a sign
to candidates of secret mystery
schools that allowed
them to share and receive
privileged information without
the fear of going to jail
or being killed.
So this is worth considering.
I can't totally prove
this, but I'm just
saying that the
symbols are there,
and they make you
think that this perhaps
is not a wine cellar.
Even more so when you consider
that right under that bas,
there's a shaft.
And officially, it's
a well, except when
you look down there,
there's absolutely no water.
And it doesn't look like there's
anything at the bottom that
could even hold the water.
And also, it's placed
very conveniently
and impractically
and dangerously
in front of the door.
And in the dark, believe me,
it's very easy to fall into.
In fact, I nearly did.
It was actually covered
with a little piece of wood.
So we must ask, therefore,
if it doesn't hold water,
where does it lead?
I came across an article
from the 19th century
of one of the monks
that lived here,
and they talked about how they
were doing some reparation
work to the grounds
back then, and they
found after a heavy
rain an entire track
on the outside of this building
that seemed to be an air shaft.
It was part of a
tunnel that seemed
to be going towards the
rotunda into a fabled ritual
chamber which no one
seemed to know much about.
And apparently,
there were shafts
that were coming out of the
ground that provided air
along this tunnel.
So possibly what
we're looking at
is one of these
very, very shafts.
Because the same thing is
found in Rosslyn in Scotland.
And that also was found by
the authors of that work
to be a tunnel that
goes under Rosslyn.
And there are also these little
shafts which are basically
not designed to hold
any water, but they
would be fantastic for
allowing air to go in there.
The second bas that differs
from all the others in this room
is this.
It's the cross with
the rose at the center.
I said earlier
that so much money
has been spent to tell
people in the world
that the order of Sion on
and the Priory of Sion,
as it became known,
never existed.
Well, that's funny,
because this is the logo.
And this was put there
in the 15th century.
So it's clear evidence that
the order not only survived
the persecution after the
Templars were run aground.
It survived and it was
living happily and thereafter
in Portugal.
In fact, I don't
know if any of you
are familiar with one of the
most famous figures in history
from Portugal, a guy
called Henry the Navigator.
He was basically hero.
He actually didn't do much
navigating, as it turns out.
The Portuguese are very
proud of their history
of navigating around the world.
I found a map which
seems to precede Columbus
by 40 years which shows
the coast of Labrador
in Newfoundland with the
Portuguese Templar flag planted
firmly on it.
Oh, dear/ That
shouldn't be there.
And they kept this very quiet.
Columbus went to
ask the Portuguese
about how to get to
the West, and they
said, oh, I have no idea.
It's just water.
They'd been going there
for a long, long time.
The Portuguese were
very curious mariners.
And Henry the
Navigator apparently
was the head of the navy.
Yes, in a certain respect
he was a navigator,
but in French, which is
the predominant language,
romantic language of the period,
"navigator" is "nautilier."
And Nautilier was the
head of the order of Sion.
That was the term.
So Henry the
Navigator was not only
the head of the Templar order.
He was a grand
master in Portugal.
He was also head of
the order of Sion,
which supposedly didn't exist.
So this guy must have belonged
to a fictitious organization.
Oh, I love this stuff.
Here are other esoteric
symbols again in this room.
There are green men
all over the place.
There is the horn of cornucopia.
Again, another
esoteric symbol showing
that the room has some
association with the gifts that
come pouring forth
from the understanding
of secret knowledge.
So if this is a wine cellar,
I'm the barber of Seville.
But my main purpose
still and focus
was to find out more
about the rotunda,
this mysterious building at
the top of the town of Thamara,
this palm tree, and to
discover absolute proof once
and for all that the
secret ritual chamber still
exists under this building,
and that like other sects
before them, the Templars
were performing the raising
ceremonies under or
inside this room.
The rotunda is an enigma.
I was born not far from it.
It's magnetized me for years,
almost like a mistress,
a good mistress.
And not surprisingly,
because it's a huge enigma.
For one thing, it's
supposed to be a church,
and it's described in the
tourist brochures as such.
And yet the church that
the Templars always
used on a daily basis was the
one at the bottom of the hill
that I showed earlier,
the Church of Notre Dame.
So why build another one within
walking distance of the first?
Doesn't seem to add up.
Then you've got the fact
that during times of siege,
the most secure building inside
the perimeter of the castle
was the rotunda.
And yet nobody-- nobody
was allowed inside it,
which is a bit weird.
And if they had been allowed
inside this building,
there was no door.
How the hell did you get in?
Well, it turns out the
only way into this building
was from under the floor from
where the altar should be.
But never, ever did this
building ever have an altar.
So the temple, with all
of this evidence in mind,
suggests that it was
designed for a purpose other
than worship.
And its keystone
to this building
was laid on the very same
year that Cretien of Troyes
moves into the namesake
town to begin writing
his wonderful Grail story.
Perhaps there's
more coincidences
than meets the eye here,
because in his story,
the Grail is carried by a woman
on a ceremonial silver tray
called a salver.
Hold that thought for a second.
During the visit to
the town's archives--
and here's the inside
of the rotunda again.
It's been polychromed in
the last few centuries.
Before that, it was
absolutely dead plain.
The Cistercians were not
into putting any decoration
anywhere.
Beautiful building.
During a visit to
the town's archives,
I came across an account
of restoration work
that was conducted
in the 1940s, and it
describes how the
exterior of the rotunda
had been coated with
reinforced concrete.
Now, I spoke to the directors at
the rotunda, and I said, well,
do we know the whereabouts
of this secret chamber that
is supposedly in the middle of
these pillars under the floor?
Because all evidence seems
to show that it's there.
That's the only way we
can get into the building.
And they said, no.
That's just fiction.
They're just making
all that stuff up.
Never been evidence of
any underground chamber.
Well, it's funny,
because there's
a 1940s account in the town
archives that clearly states,
and I quote, that the
concrete that they
put on the exterior
of the building
destroyed the entrance and
hid the entrance to what
was then described as a crypt.
So the builders must also
been smoking something weird,
because builders usually
don't do that kind of thing.
They are very matter of fact.
If they're going to
brick up an entrance,
they will break up
an entrance, and it
becomes a matter of fact.
It's written in
the town's records.
Why would you even deny that?
Well, prior to that story,
there was an oral account
by an elderly resident.
And I love talking
to elderly people
because they know
some really fun stuff.
And he recalls an
instance at the end
of the 19th century
that was basically
committed to oral memory
through his entire family.
And in fact, it's so good,
I've put this on my notes.
I'm going to quote him verbatim
because it's wonderful.
This is what he said.
"It was said in old times that
master masons and carpenters
were hired from the town
to work on the maintenance
of the castle of Thamara.
It was the habit of
one of these masters
to return home and register
the alterations made
inside the castle because
these would continue
until much of what was old
would be made unrecognizable
or made to disappear.
One of the things
that riled in the most
was the disfiguration of
the beautiful and intriguing
Arab pathway that the
old monks of the temple
used in their ceremonies
and led directly
to the basement of the rotunda."
Whoops.
"Even in those days, the
brothers living in the convent
used to share from
memory stories
with the Masons of how
the Templar master ordered
the pathway leading to
it to be constructed
in the Arabic
style, and that both
were used not just for
religious ceremonies
but also for the
investiture of new knights."
There is a big clue right there.
"The monks also spoke
of the same Templar
master returning from the
Holy Land with many scrolls."
A-ha.
"He kept them safely in
the room excavated out
of the rock, which had a
doorway the monks refer to as
the Gate to the Other World.
This doorway rested on
very ancient stonework
upon whose uprights
the Templars carved
dragons, and on the lintel
a kind of winged serpent.
Tradition states that an old Jew
was the only person permitted
to enter the cave to work on
the translation of the scrolls.
Later, this man spoke of
the results of his labor
and how several
volumes of manuscripts
had been translated into Latin."
Oh, I love this stuff.
And yet, so far to
the Orthodox people,
this place does not exist.
This underground chamber and
this tunnel do not exist.
And here we have
it in local memory.
They talked about
this at length.
We don't know what happened
to the scrolls, but we do
know that the person,
the Templar master that
brought the scrolls
back from the Holy Land,
was none other than a man
called Gualdino Paes, who
happens to be one of those
five Templar procurators
who were sent on a
secret mission in 1125
by the Grand Master
himself, Hugues de Payens,
to create a Portuguese crown.
So the story, the oral account,
links up with historical fact
now.
Ha-ha.
All this is officially
denied, of course.
Doesn't exist.
But oh, there's a
bit of a problem,
because when UNESCO gave the
Portuguese government quite
a lot of money to
start beautifying
the perimeter of the
castle of Thamara,
they cleared an area of brush
around the original gate,
and oh my God, it reveals
the actual entrance
to a cave, which is a bit
inconvenient because that
doesn't exist
apparently, and nor
does the lintel with the
dragons and the serpents
carved upon it, which is
there to this very day.
And you try going there
with official permission.
They deny even,
when you're pointing
at it, that it actually exists.
They said, oh, no.
It's just an entrance to a mine.
I said, so you're
going to dig a mine
under the foundation
of the Tower
of the main gate of a castle?
Are you mad?
So all of this is still there.
And clearly, there
is a ritual chamber
under the tour of the rotunda
because so many accounts
are pointing to that direction.
The oral accounts talk
about how this chamber was
used for the
investiture of knights
that used to be indoctrinated
into the inner brotherhood
of the Templars.
And of course, the highest
grade of initiation
was the resurrection
ritual that was always
conducted in a specific
chamber, usually called
a bridal chamber,
where you are connected
with your divine bride.
Here is the inside
of the rotunda,
the bit on top of the
chamber that doesn't exist.
And a big clue that there
was a ritual going on here
and it was associated
with the ancient mysteries
is actually in the windows.
They are made of honeycombs.
It's the only place, the
only Templar building
I've been able to find, that
has this particular shape
of window.
And they are still,
to this very day,
they still have the honeycomb
paint on the top there
you can see all that
on the right-hand side.
And it's a big clue,
because the ancient chambers
that were used way before
the time of the Templar--
I'm talking going back
at least 2000 BC--
all across Europe and
certainly the Middle East,
all of these chambers used
for the very same ritual
were either built in
the shape of a beehive
or were decorated in
a honeycomb pattern.
So essentially, what
the Templars are saying
is that you are sitting--
standing inside
a bridal chamber.
This is where you become
married to the divine wisdom
in the form of a female
deity, an eternal virgin.
And the priestesses in the old
days who actually administered
the initiate to be taken out
of the secret ritual chamber--
and they used to be
brought out at daylight
to face the rising sun.
These people were called bees.
And it's also the
same epitaph that
was given to the
people that were
upholding a holy bloodline.
This is why so many Egyptian
pharaohs that were supposedly
associated with
this holy bloodline
and the Merovingian
kings were always
buried with hundreds of gold
bees in their sarcophagi.
Yeah.
So it brings us back
again to the Grail story.
This is literally a
visual interpretation
of the seeker that
marries the maiden.
He is married the
building itself,
because the processes that are
taking place in the building
have not just made the
resurrection ritual possible.
He has now become part of
the actual building itself.
He has come to see the light.
So it's a very
important building.
I can't spend enough
time at this place.
I take a couple of groups
there every couple of years,
once we've got out of
the cake shop, that is.
Very hard to get them
out of the cake shop.
But here's the best
part of the story.
The Templars-- it's very curious
that the Templars did not
call this building a
rotunda, even though I've
been calling it a
rotunda because it
has a sort of rotunda shape.
And the Portuguese don't refer
to it as a rotunda either,
although the word also means
the same thing in Portuguese.
Now, the Templars called
it something else.
They called it a Charola.
And it was so blindingly obvious
that it took me all this time
looking at this building
to find out the very thing
that I've been
searching for all along,
because when you look
at the word "Charola"
and you translate
it into English,
it literally translates as
a salver, a ceremonial tray.
This building is the tray upon
which the Grail is delivered.
What an unusual name
to give a building.
The secret is literally
hardwired into the building.
So in other words,
the processes that
take place inside this
geometric building sited
at the intersection
of two of the Earth's
electromagnetic currents
generates an environment
that offers anyone
inside it direct access
to the Grail, offers
direct access to knowledge.
And that knowledge is
achieved by undertaking
a near-death experience.
Pretty cool stuff, isn't it?
Took me 15 years
to work that out.
Oh, it was worth it.
Let's look at some other
ritual places of the Templars,
because there are quite a
few of them in Portugal,
and they're very fun.
Don't get too
frightened by the name.
[LAUGHTER]
It really meant
something very profound.
"Monsanto" literally
means "a sacred mount."
Funny how words can go through
this ebb and flow of life
become something very sinister.
There is a lot of evidence
that the Templars may also
have performed resurrection
rituals at other of their most
venerated centers.
And this is one of them.
Again, fantastic place,
mostly because my grandfather
used to be a sheepherder
on this hill.
And he used to do so in
snow, and he wore no shoes.
Now, here's a real man.
Yeah.
Kids these days, they
haven't got a chance.
Yep.
Wimps.
So it's a wonderful place.
And of course, right
next to the castle walls,
they built a church
dedicated to, of course, Mary
of Magdalene.
And it is aligned to the
northeast, which is usually
a good giveaway that the
original site on which it
stands is extremely ancient.
Some of the most ancient
sites in the world
are always aligned
to the northeast.
It's the alignment to the
summer solstice sunrise, which
translates as the highest
position of the light
during the year, which
translates as ancient wisdom.
So places like Luxor,
Stonehenge, Chartes Cathedral--
always the northeast.
But that's not the most
important part of this site.
It's this boulder.
That's the most important thing.
And it's a very weird boulder.
It resembles a cosmic egg.
Now, I should point
out, first of all,
that this site was
already very, very
venerated for thousands of years
before the Templars showed up.
But they added their
own little appendages.
And they also appear
to have carved
a symbol on the side of this
egg that resembles a womb.
And if you take a
closer look at it,
this womb is actually
very appropriate,
because this site was the
focus of a cult of fertility.
And people who came
here, predominate
the Celts and the
Visigoths, they always
honored the cult of an Earth
goddess, a divine virgin.
So you see where
the connection goes.
The Templars were going where
this story already existed.
Now, what's unusual about
this big cosmic egg,
this huge boulder, is that
right under it, beneath it,
is a curious chamber
containing arches.
And it's supposed
to be a system,
according to the
official brochure,
but any person that just
looks at it carefully,
you don't even have to be a
geologist or a construction
engineer will tell you that it
doesn't hold water very well.
So you have a group of knights
on top of a hill protecting it
with a castle from invading
troops who built a hole that
doesn't hold water so they can
have water so they can drink.
Doesn't add up again.
If you're a dowser,
though, you will
notice that the two
arches just happen
to coincide with the path
of two of the Earth's
telluric currents, and the cross
right under the boulder itself.
So again, someone's
telling you something
about what goes on here.
All of this is
totally out of place
in a castle that's supposed
to be there for warcraft.
But it's totally consistent
with the Templar's doctrine
of protecting sacred
spaces long associated
with the worship of
the divine feminine.
It gets better.
I suspect that that
chamber under it
is actually a ritual chamber
where they could conduct
their ritual, because
all of these things
were always done in dark caves.
The resurrection ritual
itself was always
concerned with balance.
And typically, the
final initiation
was performed at
the equinox sunrise,
because that's the moment
when light and dark are
in complete balance.
Just like the two Templar
knights riding the one horse,
light and dark has to
be in perfect balance.
A very clever person
on one of my tours
pointed this out as
we were standing there
at the equinox that--
have you noticed how
the top of the rock
has been artificially flattened,
and it's perfectly aligned
to the Templar castle wall?
Now, think about
it for a second.
If you're going to build a wall
to keep out foreign troops,
why would you suddenly
bring the wall down
to make it easier for the
troops to get over it?
Well, you follow your
line, and look at what's
happening in the horizon.
There's what appears to be a
natural or even artificially
sculpted part of the
hill in the distance.
And it was not out of place
for people in the old days
to artificially
sculpt the landscape
to do a certain ritual.
That's the hole through which
the equinox sunrise appears,
cuts through the wall, and
hits the top of the boulder.
If that wall had been the same
height all the way through,
you couldn't have had that.
So it shows that there was
a deliberate referencing
performed by the Templars even
though the site was really
much older than they.
Then it gets really weird.
There's another second
church of the Templars
built, this time dedicated to
John the Baptist, of course.
The two are never far apart.
And then there are all
these false sarcophagi.
And I say false
sarcophagi because it's
not unusual for
people back in that--
actually, before the
time of the Templars
in that part of the world
to hone out stone and make
rock sarcophagi out of it.
Not unusual.
The problem with these is
that they're too shallow.
This one nearest to us is
only about three inches deep.
It doesn't seem to
serve any purpose.
And I couldn't find any
evidence of cremation either.
So they are too shallow
to hold a body for burial,
making them very impractical
as funerary boxes.
However, they are on
the summit, and they all
face the sunrise, which is the
esoteric direction associated
with the ritual resurrection.
There's a mirror to the story.
At the bottom of the
hill on the west side,
this is what I do to
people on my tours.
[LAUGHTER]
In fact, I don't
remember taking them out.
They may still be there.
They'll be perfectly preserved.
At the bottom of
the hill, you have
sarcophagi which can hold
bodies, as you can see.
They're very deep.
And they're in the west,
which is usually the tradition
for going into the other world.
That's where you begin your
ritual or resurrection.
Now, here's the fun part.
Imagine you have to carve
a huge amount of stone
away from this enormous
boulder to achieve this effect.
That's a lot of laborious work.
But a close look at the actual
periphery of these sarcophagi
show that they're
very uneven steps.
And if you were to put a lid
on top of it, what would happen
is that you would allow
enough space for rodents
to come in and eat the body.
That doesn't make any sense.
Why go through all that trouble
and watch snakes and rats go in
and eat the body?
However, it'll be
perfect for a person who
is still breathing, needs air,
but doesn't need much light.
And that's part of the ritual.
So it's just a
theory that I have,
but when you connect the two
sites and the two churches,
they're all perfectly
mirroring each other.
There's a relationship
between the stuff
at the bottom of the hill in the
west, the traditional position
of entering the other
world during a ritual,
and the one's on top of the
hill that face the sunrise.
So this is all very consistent
also with Egyptian resurrection
rituals, which, of course,
the candidates always
enter the restricted
chamber in the west.
They started on the east bank of
the Nile that crossed the Nile.
They then entered the
temple through the west
on the west bank.
And then they were
basically did their stuff
under these special temples.
They got up on top of the
temple in the morning at dawn,
and they were raised
from a figurative grave
and taken to greet
the morning star
Sirius or the equinox sunrise.
And as I mentioned
earlier, Sirius, of course,
is a star intimately
associated with divine wisdom.
Her more physical version
is, of course, Isis, Sophis.
And of course, they
are all expressions
of the original divine feminine,
which is also the Grail.
Now, one evidence-- god,
these things are good.
I've had some more.
I'm going to order
sushi next time.
One evidence of the
temples are following
an Egyptian resurrection
ritual is actually
the dimensions of these graves.
It never occurred
to me that being 6
foot 5 can be very handy.
Terrible for buying clothes.
But the first time I ever
laid inside the sarcophagus
in the king's chamber-- where,
by the way, no one's ever
have been found to be buried.
It turns out that, despite the
thinking that might not fit,
it turned out to be a
perfect fit, eerily so.
It's exactly the
width of my body,
exactly the length from
the flat of my forehead
to the flat of my feet.
That's how I know
the measurement.
When I lay down in one of these,
it's exactly the same width
and length as well.
So whoever built this
had to have had knowledge
of the earlier design as well.
It's too coincidental
that these boxes
on opposite sides of
the world are exactly
the same length and width.
I don't have any
other explanation.
Recent evidence now shows
that this sarcophagus
in the king's chamber
apparently comes
with a frequency of its own.
And it's a frequency that's also
found in other chambers, which
apparently around
Europe appear to have
come with the same
tradition of resurrection.
They're either called houses
of Osiris or houses of the bee.
The Hypogeum in
Malta is one of them.
There are certain mounds
in Britain and Ireland
which also are different shaped.
But all of them have
exactly the same frequency,
and the frequency that this
box resonates out is 112 Hertz.
Excuse me.
112 Hertz.
Not much was thought
about this, apart
from the fact that you have
many chambers around the world,
different in design, but all
sharing the same frequency
range.
And it took a neurosurgeon
to look at this
and say, well, wait a minute.
That's the frequency range--
112 Hertz is about
the frequency range
what switches the left brain
function to right brain.
It's a trigger.
And you think about
it for a second.
The one thing you did not want
to take with you when you're
having an out of body experience
or having a ritual, or even
a meditation, you don't want
to take your logical processing
thought brain in there.
You want to be in a calm state.
You want to be meditating.
You want to switch
to right brain.
And that's where the
connection suddenly
begins to hint that these
places were built for something
other than literal burial.
They were built
for a ritual that
engages a person that is alive
to switch, to stop thinking
and start thinking.
Sorry, and start feeling.
So there is an
implication there.
And finally, I want
to just point out
this in this other
site in Portugal.
This is Sintra.
It is that beautiful.
That is not Photoshop.
That is an actual photograph.
I was literally born at
the base of this hill,
and now I'm beginning
to understand why.
At the bottom of this hill
is the town of Sintra.
It's 40 miles west of
Lisbon in Portugal.
And it too was given
to the Templars
by the King of Portugal
under exceptional conditions.
And I mean exceptional
conditions.
It was given to the one guy--
one of the five
guys who were sent
on this clandestine mission
by the Templar master
from Jerusalem to create
Portugal as a nation-state.
And it was given to him
while he's in absentia,
he's actually in Jerusalem.
It's as though he was expected
to come back and complete
the task.
But there is
evidence that people
were worshiping a divine
virgin on this hill
as far back as 5,000 BC.
And it was a place
that was also favored
by hermits of all kinds.
Now, having said
that, I want just
to remind you again
of Article Seven
of the Rule of the Elected
Brothers of the Temple,
because it was that
secret little book which
was found in the possession
of this Templar master
who was caught, unfortunately,
by the Inquisition.
And it said in rule seven,
"Build in your houses
meeting places that
are large and hidden
that can be accessed
by underground tunnels
so that the brothers may go
to meetings without the risk
of getting into trouble.
In the houses of the
unelected brothers,
it is prohibited to conduct
certain materials pertaining
to the philosophical sciences
or the transmutation of base
metals into gold and silver.
This should only be undertaken
in secret and hidden places."
Portugal is renowned
for earthquakes.
And once in a while,
in 1970 for example,
when I was a young nipper--
actually, before
I moved to Britain
and concocted this
crazy accent--
I was privy to one
of those earthquakes.
And you haven't lived till
you've been in the 6.9.
Oh, that's a good one.
That's a meaty one.
Well, they began to fix
up some of the buildings
in central Sintra.
Some of them were
underneath cafes and hotels.
And they found a Hypogeum
or ritual chamber
built by the Templars,
and it was absolutely
packed with access tunnels five
levels below the town today.
And it was discovered
underneath a very good cafe.
What a coincidence.
Group, we're going to
stop here for coffee.
Why?
No reason.
And here's another
one of those tunnels.
When you consider
that this is granite,
that's pretty laborious.
That's a lot of hard work.
This particular tunnel has
a connecting passageway
that leads one way
to the nearby Templar
palace in the middle
of Sintra town square.
And another goes all the way
uphill for about 300 meters
to the castle that the Templars
rebuilt. And 15 minutes
walk away from these tunnels,
under all of these Templar
buildings--
By the way, all the
buildings are still there.
They've just been remodeled
into modern businesses.
So the whole of
Sintra was a big area
of Templar veneration, a
place where they conducted,
obviously, secret ritual.
15 minutes walk is a
property which defies belief.
[GASPING]
Yeah, that pretty
much explains it.
This was actually rebuilt
in the modern era at the--
it was about 1904
that this stuff
was added to this property.
But in 1371, this
property was still
in the possession of
the Knights Templar.
And back then, it was
called the Forest of Angels.
It was part of an ancient right
of way, arranged passageway,
that connected various sacred
sites like a pilgrimage route.
There are sacred springs.
So again, the Templars,
owned the property right
in the very beginning
which associated
with certain rites
of the mysteries,
pilgrimage, and also places
that allowed for a certain state
of mind to take place.
Today, as you can
see, it is a site
of an extensive property owned
by successive Masonic families.
So in a matter of speaking,
the Templars sold the property
to the Freemasons, and he kept
it in the family, so to speak.
Show us some more
pictures of these gardens.
They're beautiful.
And if you know
your symbolism, you
know exactly what
it's telling you.
I won't tell you because,
well, we'd be here all day.
The gardens can only be
described as a deliberately
designed ritual landscape.
It is full of mythical
figures, esoteric symbols,
packed with sacred
geometry, observatories
for watching the stars,
all symbols pertaining
to the mysteries teachings.
So in other words,
it was designed
as an outdoor classroom.
And it wasn't exclusive
to the Masons,
because when the man that
took over this property
at the beginning of
the 20th century,
he then opened it to
the public as well
to ask the curious to
start inquiring about what
these things about.
And that's how the Masons
said, well, come with me
little boy, little girl.
And then they would indoctrinate
you to the lesser mysteries.
And if you're curious
and you are responsible,
they would bring you into
the inner brotherhood.
And you know where
that story goes.
This is not the
highlight of this trip.
The greatest wonder
is the labyrinth
of tunnels dug into the solid
bedrock of the mountainside.
And they penetrate
deep into the hill
as though meant for initiates
who wish to immerse themselves
in total dark seclusion of
the womb of the Earth mother.
Total sensory deprivation.
And most of them are
absolutely pitch black.
Take a torch.
They also bear an uncanny
resemblance to the tunnels
dug by the Templars in
Ethiopia, and specifically
the Templars from Portugal who
had an obsession with Ethiopia,
in the 12th century.
And these two join a
number of churches that
are cut out of living rock.
Show you a few more pictures.
There's not many.
There's only a couple of
them that are actually lit.
All of them are completely dark.
They literally are a
perfect environment meant
for a shamanic journeying.
If you want to spend a day,
and if you go off season,
you can really have
this place to yourself.
It's a wonderful place to go.
I believe there's a
nearby cafe as well.
Actually, there's five of them.
And they go on and on and on.
A lot of them are now
blocked by debris.
In fact, the Arabs said,
before the Templar showed up,
the mountain is actually hollow.
Most of the hill of
Sintra is hollow.
You can hear the ocean
coming under the mountain
at high tide.
And there's a lot of bad
earthquakes that happen here.
So some of these tunnels
are now choked by debris,
but a couple of them are lit
for the benefit of tourism.
And this is where the
story gets very exciting,
because one of these tunnels
leads to a shaft sunk
40 feet into the Earth.
And here it is from above.
And you wonder, now, why
would an idiot put this there?
And before the lawyers came
around and put this metal ring
around it, you could
just walk in there
in the middle of the
night and go, oh.
I guarantee you would
not be resurrected.
And again, the
official brochures
describe this as a well.
But any close
examination of the shaft
shows that it clearly
never did, nor is it
capable of holding a drop
of water, most of all
because it has a
shaft leading to it,
and the shaft goes downhill,
and the water goes out.
It is an 18 foot diameter hole.
It is surrounded by
a rough, dry stone
wall in the shape of
a horseshoe, which
appears to be much older
than its surroundings.
And in fact, the entrance, for
the people who are curious,
of all the compass
directions, it
points exactly to the
northeast, and aligns perfectly
with the summer
solstice sunrise.
So the entrance to the shaft
is referencing the highest
position of the light
in the solar calendar,
which in esoteric terms
equates to ancient wisdom.
Well, that day also
just happens to coincide
with the feast day of the
Templar's greatest hero,
John the Baptist.
Yes.
You can see how these things
just fall into your lap.
Here's a view down the shaft.
This shaft consist
of five levels
of unevenly stacked
and undressed
limestone blocks, here and
there patched and repaired.
And behind these
blocks, they hide
five narrow circular galleries.
Each one of them is accessed
through really claustrophobic
spiral stairs set
into a rough wall,
and all in a measured
style that suggests
a later refurbishment,
again, possibly due
to the earthquake activity.
But they certainly did not
make this easy for you.
It was not a day-- a
picnic in the park.
You actually went
for a certain trial,
almost as though you're required
to walk through these spiral
staircase in humility.
You bent down all the
time, even short people.
Here we are at the bottom.
Here we have what basically is
a well that does not hold water.
It has an entrance that faces
the sun whose light cannot
penetrate down the shaft.
So it clearly serves
no practical purpose.
So we are left
with a possibility
to consider it was used
for a ritual purpose.
At the bottom of
this shaft, there
is another underground
passage, and it
leads to a second well of
a very different nature.
Beautiful place.
Architecturally, it's much more
advanced, and it's in a style
common to the time
of the Templars.
But if you look
closely, it does show
that it has been
refurbished at the beginning
of the 20th century.
So something's been added to it
again because it's built also
in the Revivalist style common
to that period, which just
happens to be the
same Revivalist
period common to the
time of the 12th century.
So here's a story
behind his property.
It was inherited in the
19th century by a Freemason.
The property was in complete
disrepair at the time
because Portugal was going
through some pretty hard times.
And it was bought at an
auction by a man called
Carvalho Monteiro, which
may not mean anything
to you unless you're
Portuguese and your curious.
Because Carvalho Monterio almost
sounds like an invented name.
It means "the oak tree
on top of a mound."
There's a druidic name
if I ever heard of one.
You've got the mound, and
you've got the oak on top of it.
It's druidic symbolism.
So whether it was a real
name or an invented one,
the fact is that this man
was a 33rd degree Mason,
and his symbols are
all over the place.
What he did was
with his property,
he rebuilt the entire site,
put his entire family fortune
into it.
Total dedication to his craft.
And he also extensively
added to the property
in the Revivalist
style of his period.
There are extensive works
throughout property.
Every one of them, and I
mean every one of them--
I'm talking at least
100 pieces of works,
from statues to
buildings-- are all
accounted for in the
architect's blueprints.
I know.
I've gone through all of them.
There is no record
of either shaft.
And you'd think, stuff
of this magnitude
would have required bills
of sale, pickaxes, dynamite,
workmen, horses.
There is not one
shred of evidence
that this person actually
built these shafts.
He may have refurbished
them, but it clearly
shows that the shafts were
already on the property
long before the Masons arrived,
and certainly were there when
the Templars arrived as well.
The entrance to
the shaft is hidden
inside a neolithic dolmen.
How's that for an instance?
You walk past it,
you think, oh, it's
just a-- it looks like
a neolithic dolmen.
The capstone is
hidden by the moss.
But if you actually
look closely and you
go through this little gap,
there's actually a huge stone.
And you go like this, and
you think, oh, there's
something behind it.
Because you knock
it, it's hollow.
Well, if you just push
it in the right moment,
it pivots, just like
"Indiana Jones."
And you walk in, and
you go down the shaft.
The connection--
it's very theatrical,
but there's a
connection to this,
because the original dolmen
throughout the world also,
most of them, were actually
used for shamanic journeying
as well, specifically the ones
that are aligned east-west.
And now you know why
they're aligned east-west.
It's part of the
ritual direction.
There is also this beautiful
chapel, which definitely
was built during his time.
It's a gorgeous building.
But the best part of
it is on the side,
because people walk by
this and they go, ah!.
Without realizing what
they're looking at
is one of the most important
symbols of the Templar world.
If you can remember how during
the official confirmation
in Troy in 1128, Bernard
of Clairvaux specifically
stated how the
Templars must follow
the obedience of Bethany, the
castle of Mary and Martha--
that is, obedience to the line
of Mary of Bethany or Mary
Magdalene.
What you're seeing here
is the emblem of that vow.
You have the two
castles, and they're
sitting on top of the green
man, the rejuvenating,
resurrected god of nature.
So it's showing
that the practices
were still alive and well
long after the Templars went
underground.
They were resumed again in the
20th century, still probably
being done so today
quietly in the background.
But it does clearly
show that there's
this continuation
of nature worship
with this resurrected
god hero that you
find throughout Templar and
also early Christian history.
By the way, I told you it
was going to be heavy work.
One aspect of temple making
that I've come across
during my research
on how temples
are aligned to each other--
and if you look at temple
history throughout the world
and how they seem to coincide
with the same building
period or the same
function, they all
appear to be aligned to each
other in perfect triangles.
I found this in the
Andes, in India, in China,
and so forth, every single
time without exception.
And the Templars apparently were
doing exactly the same thing,
because if you take
the center of Thamara
and that alter, the
rotunda, and you
put a pin on the altar of
Monsanto where that egg was,
and then you go to the Forest
of Angels, it's a perfect--
and I mean exactly perfect
isosceles triangle yet again.
So they were following
the same tradition
of temple making and
temple alignment that
was pursued by people way
before their / it was part
of a long lineage of
people who were following
ancient mysteries.
And the geometric
alignment doesn't even
stop there, because later when
the order was extinguished
by the Church, allegedly,
the Templars of Portugal
kept on going.
They just changed their name.
The biggest joke in history.
The King of Portugal, who was
secretly a Templar grandmaster,
writes to the Pope
and says, oh, we've
extinguished the Order
of the Knights Templar,
but coincidentally,
yesterday there
was a new order that
appeared called the Order
of the Knights of Christ.
What a strange thing.
We lose one order,
we gain the other.
It's same guys.
And the Pope bought it
hook, line, and sinker.
The biggest practical
joke in history.
And they went on
practicing together.
They were now
practicing and working
with the other Templars that ran
away to Rosslyn, to Scotland.
And you know the story
behind that, I'm sure.
Well it turns out
that when you actually
connect these further dots,
you put Thamara and Rosslyn
and you go back to the origin
of the story on Mount Zion,
you've got a perfect
triangle yet again.
But what happens when
you bisect that triangle
by the number of nature, the
golden mean, the golden ratio?
You bisect the
triangle, and it hits
exactly this big
pinnacle of rock
in the middle of
Switzerland called
Sion, where another secretive
organization related
to the original
order of the temple--
to the order of monks in Sion
and Jerusalem exists today.
And having made
several inquiries
as to what they're doing
there and who they are,
the doors closed very quickly.
And it tells me I'm on
the right path of inquiry.
That could be another thing.
There's another book's
in there somewhere.
I thought the coincidence
is extraordinary.
But if you're very
curious and you
follow that bisection line all
the way across the Atlantic,
would you believe it
ends up in Newfoundland
and right in the heart
of a town that was--
a new town that was built in
honor of John the Baptist,
St. John's, Newfoundland.
Keep following the line, and
end up in your own country
and see what happens.
I'm going to leave that for you
to think about for a second.
It's very curious.
So was this what the King
of Portugal had in mind
all along when he
designed the seal
on the charter for the land
where the Templars created
a kingdom within a kingdom?
If you remember, that
other unusual meaning
for the name of the town
Thamara in Portuguese
is "to drink," which is a very
unusual name to give a town.
Well, maybe.
Because like all secret
symbols, drinking
marks the beginning
of the journey
into the mysteries,
when the initiate is
said to drink of the
knowledge of the mysteries.
We just happen to know this
metaphor by another name.
It is the cup of
everlasting life.
So when you drink
this knowledge,
you are essentially
following in the footsteps
of a bloodline of seers,
of mystics, of alchemists
all of whom honor
a deity from whom
it is said all wisdom emanates.
This deity, this
source of wisdom,
is always portrayed
as a divine virgin.
And through the ages, she
has taken on many guises.
She has been called Isis.
She has been known as the
Magdal-eder, or the Magdalene
as we call her,
the divine virgin
to whom the Templars erected
a disproportionate amount
of churches.
Not to mention the
gothic cathedrals
as well that still bear her
medieval name, Notre Dame.
And one building in particular
where the masculine is married
to the divine bride,
and that is this place,
the rotunda of
Thamara, that salver,
that tray upon which
the Grail rests.
It is built in the center
of a Templar kingdom
inside Europe's
first nation-state,
a sacred land
created from scratch
by a group of dedicated
knights solely for the purpose
of finding that most elusive of
all quests in the 12th century
and today, the quest
for enlightenment
and personal empowerment.
So this is the Templars
900-year secret.
It is their greatest
accomplishments,
and the one story that's never
been told, incredibly enough.
And if you wish to follow the
rest of this original tale,
have I got a book for you.
[LAUGHTER]
Thank you very much for
putting up with this.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]